Types of errors in C
Error type			Meaning	Example
Syntax error			C code violates language syntax	Missing ;
Compile-time error		Compiler cannot compile the program	Undeclared variable
Warning	Compiler 		detects a possible problem	Using an uninitialized variable
Linker error			Required symbol definition is missing or duplicated	Undefined reference to a function
Runtime error			Problem occurs while the program executes	Invalid memory access
Logical error			Program runs but gives the wrong result	Using + instead of *





Segmentation fault
A segmentation fault (SIGSEGV) occurs when a process attempts a memory access that the operating system cannot permit.
Common causes include:
- Dereferencing a null pointer
- Dereferencing an invalid or uninitialized pointer
- Accessing memory after it has been freed
- Writing to memory that is not writable
- Accessing memory outside an array's bounds, when this results in an invalid access
C has undefined behavior for many invalid pointer operations, so not every memory error produces a segmentation fault.
Example 1: Dereferencing a null pointer
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int *ptr = NULL;

    *ptr = 100;

    printf("%d\n", *ptr);

    return 0;
}


The problem is this line:
*ptr = 100;


ptr does not point to a valid int object. The program has undefined behavior and will commonly crash with a segmentation fault on Linux.
How to debug it
Compile with debug information:
gcc -g -O0 main.c -o app


Run it:
./app


If it crashes, use GDB:
gdb ./app


At the GDB prompt:
run
backtrace
print ptr
list


These commands help identify the crashing function, inspect the pointer, and display the relevant source code.
Correct version
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int value = 100;
    int *ptr = &value;

    printf("%d\n", *ptr);

    return 0;
}


Here, ptr points to a valid object.







Core dumps
A core dump is a snapshot of a process's state when it terminates abnormally. Depending on the system configuration, it may contain memory contents, register values, thread states, and other debugging information.
You can load a core dump in GDB to investigate a crash after the process has already stopped.
Step 1: Enable core dumps
In a Linux terminal:
ulimit -c unlimited


This removes the shell's soft limit on core-dump size, subject to system limits and configuration.
Check the setting:
ulimit -c


If the output is unlimited, the shell's core-size limit is unlimited.
Step 2: Compile a program that crashes
Save this as crash.c:
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int *ptr = NULL;

    printf("Starting program\n");
    fflush(stdout);

    *ptr = 100;

    return 0;
}


Compile with debugging information:
gcc -g -O0 crash.c -o crash


Run:
./crash


If core dumps are enabled and permitted, the program may produce a core dump. On many Linux systems, the dump is handled by systemd-coredump or another configured core handler rather than being saved as a file named core in the current directory.
Step 3: Find the core dump
On a system using systemd-coredump, try:
coredumpctl list


Inspect a particular crash:
coredumpctl info


Open a crash in GDB:
coredumpctl debug


Depending on your system, you may need to specify the executable or PID.
If you have a core file directly, use:
gdb ./crash core


Inside GDB:
backtrace
info registers
print ptr
list


These commands can reveal where the crash happened and the values available for inspection.
Remember: A core dump is useful after a crash because it preserves evidence of the process state. Be careful when sharing core dumps: they can contain passwords, tokens, personal data, and other sensitive memory contents.







Compiler warnings
A compiler warning indicates that the compiler found code that might be incorrect, unsafe, or unintended, even though it may still be able to compile the program.
Consider this example:
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int value;

    printf("%d\n", value);

    return 0;
}


value is an uninitialized automatic variable. Reading its indeterminate value this way results in undefined behavior for this example.
Compile with warnings enabled:
gcc -Wall -Wextra -Wpedantic -g main.c -o app


Common options:
Option	Purpose
-Wall	Enables many useful warnings
-Wextra	Enables additional warnings
-Wpedantic	Warns about certain nonstandard constructs
-Werror	Treats warnings as errors
-g	Adds debugging information
-O0	Disables most optimization for easier debugging
The precise warnings depend on the compiler version and the code.
Example: format warning
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    int age = 25;

    printf("%f\n", age);

    return 0;
}


%f is for a double argument in printf(), but age is an int. This mismatch causes undefined behavior.
Correct it:
printf("%d\n", age);


Best practice
During development, a useful starting command is:
gcc -Wall -Wextra -Wpedantic -g -O0 main.c -o app


Fix warnings instead of ignoring them. For larger projects, -Werror can be helpful in continuous integration once the warning policy is established, though it may make builds sensitive to new compiler warnings.









What is GDB?
GDB stands for GNU Debugger. It is a command-line debugging tool used to examine and control a running program or investigate a program after it crashes.
With GDB, you can:
- Run a program step by step.
- Stop execution at a particular line or function using breakpoints.
- Inspect variables and pointer values.
- Examine function calls using a backtrace.
- Step into and out of functions.
- Inspect CPU registers and machine instructions.
- Debug core dumps.
- Investigate crashes and unexpected results.
GDB is commonly used with C and C++ on Linux.
5.1 Install GDB
On Ubuntu:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install gdb build-essential


Check the installed version:
gdb --version


Get GDB's built-in help:
gdb --help


5.2 Compile a C program for debugging
Create main.c:
#include <stdio.h>

int add(int a, int b)
{
    int result = a + b;
    return result;
}

int main(void)
{
    int x = 10;
    int y = 20;
    int sum = add(x, y);

    printf("Sum = %d\n", sum);

    return 0;
}


Compile it:
gcc -g -O0 -Wall -Wextra main.c -o app


Why these options?
- -g: adds debugging information, including source-line information.
- -O0: disables optimization, making source-level debugging easier.
- -Wall -Wextra: enables useful warnings.
Run the program normally:
./app


Output:
Sum = 30


Now start GDB:
gdb ./app


You should see a GDB prompt similar to:
(gdb)


You can now enter debugger commands.




Starting and stopping a program
Command				Meaning
run or r			Start the program
start				Start and stop temporarily at the beginning of main()
continue or c			Continue running until the next stopping point
kill				Stop the debugged process
quit or q			Exit GDB
help				Show command help
help run			Explain a particular command
apropos breakpoint		Search help topics for a keyword




(gdb) run


This executes the program. If no breakpoints or other stopping conditions exist, it normally runs to completion.
For a program that needs command-line arguments:
(gdb) run arg1 arg2


You can also configure arguments before starting:
(gdb) set args arg1 arg2
(gdb) run



Breakpoints
A breakpoint tells GDB to pause execution at a chosen location.
Command					Meaning
break main				Stop at the beginning of main()
break add				Stop when execution reaches add()
break main.c:12				Set a breakpoint at line 12 of main.c
info breakpoints			List breakpoints and watchpoints
disable 1				Disable breakpoint number 1
enable 1				Enable breakpoint number 1
delete 1				Delete breakpoint number 1
clear main.c:12				Clear a breakpoint at that source location


(gdb) break main
(gdb) run


GDB pauses when execution reaches the breakpoint.
You can then inspect variables and step through the program.




Stepping through code
These are among the most important GDB commands.
Command					Meaning
next or n				Execute the next source line without stepping into called functions
step or s				Execute the next source line, stepping into a called function when possible
finish					Continue until the current function returns
continue or c				Resume execution
until					Continue until a later line in the current frame or a specified location
nexti or ni				Execute one machine instruction without stepping into a called function
stepi or si				Execute one machine instruction, stepping into calls
advance main.c:15			Continue until execution reaches a specified location, if reached first


(gdb) break main
(gdb) run
(gdb) next
(gdb) next
(gdb) step



Inspect variables
Command			Meaning
print x or p x		Print the value of x
print sum		Print the value of sum
print x + y		Evaluate an expression
display x		Automatically display x each time execution stops
info locals		Show local variables in the current function frame
info args		Show the current function's arguments
undisplay 1		Remove automatic display number 1
set variable x = 100	Change a variable's value while debugging



(gdb) break add
(gdb) run
(gdb) print a
(gdb) print b
(gdb) next
(gdb) print result



GDB stack and function-call commands
A stack trace shows how execution reached the current location. It is especially valuable when a program crashes deep inside multiple function calls.
Command				Meaning
backtrace or bt			Show the function-call stack
backtrace 			full	Show stack frames and available local variables
frame 0				Select the current frame
frame 1				Select the caller's frame
up				Move one frame toward the caller
down				Move one frame toward the called function
info frame			Show information about the selected frame
info args			Show arguments for the selected frame
info locals			Show local variables for the selected frame
return				Force the selected function to return immediately
return 100			Force a return value of 100 where supported

Example:
(gdb) backtrace
(gdb) frame 1
(gdb) info args
(gdb) info locals








Save this as debug.c:
#include <stdio.h>

int calculate(int a, int b)
{
    int result = a - b;
    return result;
}

int main(void)
{
    int x = 20;
    int y = 10;

    int answer = calculate(x, y);

    printf("Answer = %d\n", answer);

    return 0;
}


Suppose you intended to add the numbers, but the program subtracts them.
Step 1: Compile
gcc -g -O0 -Wall -Wextra debug.c -o debug


Step 2: Start GDB
gdb ./debug


Step 3: Set a breakpoint
(gdb) break calculate
(gdb) run


GDB pauses at the beginning of calculate().
Step 4: Inspect arguments
(gdb) print a
(gdb) print b


You should see that a is 20 and b is 10.
Step 5: Execute the calculation
(gdb) next
(gdb) print result


The value of result will be 10.
