 Compilation and linking
When you write a C program, the computer cannot execute the C source code directly. It must be translated into machine code and combined with any required code from other files or libraries.




The complete process is:
Source file
main.c

Preprocessor
Processes #include, #define, macros
Output: main.i

Compiler
Translates C into assembly
Output: main.s

Assembler
Produces machine-code object file
Output: main.o

Linker
Combines object files and resolves references

Executable
Program ready to load and run


Compilation
Compilation is the process of translating a C source file into lower-level code. In everyday usage, people often use “compilation” to describe the entire build process, but technically, compilation is one stage.
Linking
Linking combines object files and required library code or references, resolves symbols between them, and produces an executable or another library.
For example, if main.c calls a function implemented in math_utils.c, the linker connects the call to that function's definition.







Object files
An object file contains compiled machine code and supporting information, such as symbols and relocation records. It is usually not a complete executable by itself.
Common extensions:
- .c — C source file
- .h — header file
- .i — preprocessed C source
- .s — assembly source
- .o — object file on Linux
- .a — static library on Linux
- .so — shared library on Linux
Example:
gcc -c main.c -o main.o


The -c option compiles and assembles the source file without linking it into an executable.
To inspect the object file:
file main.o
nm main.o
objdump -d main.o


- file identifies the file format.
- nm lists symbols.
- objdump -d displays disassembled machine code.







Symbol table
A symbol table is information maintained by object files and executables about named entities such as functions and global variables.
For example:
int count = 10;

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}


The object file may contain symbols for count and add.
Common symbol categories:
Symbol	Meaning
Defined symbol	An object file provides the symbol's definition
Undefined symbol	The object file references a symbol defined elsewhere or supplied by a library
Global symbol	Can be referenced from other linked files when visible
Local symbol	Restricted to the relevant object file or scope, depending on the symbol
Check symbols with:
nm main.o


For example, U printf means the object file refers to printf, but does not define it. The linker must resolve that reference.
Remember: The symbol table helps the linker determine which function or variable a reference refers to.






Declaration vs definition
This is one of the most important C concepts for understanding linking.
Declaration
A declaration tells the compiler about a name and its type.
int add(int a, int b);


This tells the compiler that a function named add accepts two int parameters and returns an int. It does not provide the function's body.
Definition
A definition provides the function implementation.
int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}


Variable example
extern int count;  // Declaration; defined elsewhere

int total = 100;  // Definition


extern int count; declares a variable without defining it, assuming this is a file-scope declaration without an initializer. int total = 100; defines a variable and initializes it.
Declaration	Definition
Tells the compiler about a name and type	Provides the function body or defines an object
A function prototype is a declaration	A function body is a definition
Often placed in a header file	Often placed in a source file
May refer to something defined elsewhere	Supplies the actual definition
Important: A declaration alone does not provide a missing function implementation. If a program uses a function but no linked file or library defines it, linking normally fails with an undefined-reference error.







Header files (.h)
A header file contains declarations and shared definitions that source files need to know about.
Common contents include:
- Function prototypes
- Structure and enumeration declarations
- Type aliases (typedef)
- Macros and constants
- External variable declarations using extern
Example project:
math_utils.h
Function declaration
int add(int a, int b);



math_utils.c
Function definition
int add(int a, int b) { return a + b; }



main.c
Includes the header and calls the function
#include "math_utils.h"



#include vs linking
These are different operations:
- #include "math_utils.h" makes the header's contents available during preprocessing.
- Compiling math_utils.c produces math_utils.o.
- Linking main.o and math_utils.o resolves the call to add().
A header file does not automatically link the function implementation. It usually provides the information required to compile the caller.
Use include guards to prevent the same header from being processed repeatedly in one translation unit:
#ifndef MATH_UTILS_H
#define MATH_UTILS_H

int add(int a, int b);

#endif








Multiple source files
A real C project is often split into multiple .c files to organize and reuse code.
Let's create this simple project:
project/
├── main.c
├── math_utils.c
└── math_utils.h


File 1: math_utils.h
#ifndef MATH_UTILS_H
#define MATH_UTILS_H

int add(int a, int b);

#endif


File 2: math_utils.c
#include "math_utils.h"

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}


File 3: main.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include "math_utils.h"

int main(void)
{
    int result = add(10, 20);

    printf("Result = %d\n", result);

    return 0;
}


Compile and link
Option A: Compile and link in one command
gcc main.c math_utils.c -o app
./app


Output:
Result = 30


Option B: Compile each source file separately
gcc -c main.c -o main.o
gcc -c math_utils.c -o math_utils.o
gcc main.o math_utils.o -o app
./app


Output is the same.
Why use separate compilation? If you change only math_utils.c, you can rebuild that file and link again without recompiling every unchanged source file. Build systems such as make automate this process.








Libraries in C 📚
A library is a collection of reusable functions, code, and related resources that programs can use instead of implementing everything themselves.
For example, the C standard library provides functions such as:
- printf() — formatted output
- scanf() — formatted input
- strlen() — string length
- malloc() — dynamic memory allocation
- memcpy() — memory copying
There are two common library types:
- Static library: commonly .a on Linux.
- Shared library: commonly .so on Linux.
8. Static linking
Static linking incorporates the required library code into the executable during the linking stage.
main.o

+
libmath.a

Executable
Required library code incorporated


Example
Create a static library from math_utils.o:
gcc -c math_utils.c -o math_utils.o
ar rcs libmath.a math_utils.o


Link your program against it:
gcc main.c -L. -lmath -o app


Here:
- ar rcs creates the archive libmath.a.
- -L. tells GCC to search the current directory for libraries.
- -lmath requests the library named libmath.
- -o app names the executable app.
Run it:
./app


Advantages and disadvantages
- The executable includes the required library code, so it may be easier to deploy without that particular shared library.
- Executables can be larger.
- Updating the library usually requires relinking the executable to incorporate the new code.
Static linking does not mean that the entire operating system or every dependency is included; that depends on what you link and how.








Dynamic linking
Dynamic linking allows an executable to use a shared library rather than incorporating all of its code into the executable.
On Linux, a shared library typically has the .so extension.
Executable: app

Shared library
libmath.so

The dynamic loader resolves and loads required libraries at program startup or when needed.

Example
Build a shared library:
gcc -fPIC -c math_utils.c -o math_utils.o
gcc -shared -o libmath.so math_utils.o


Compile and link the application:
gcc main.c -L. -lmath -o app


For this example, run the executable with the library directory available to the runtime loader:
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./app


Expected output:
Result = 30


LD_LIBRARY_PATH tells the Linux runtime loader to search the current directory for shared libraries. It is useful for testing; system-wide installations normally use standard library directories and loader configuration instead.
Advantages and disadvantages
- The executable can be smaller.
- Multiple processes can share the same loaded library code.
- A compatible shared library can be updated independently of the executable.
- The required shared library must be available at runtime, with a compatible ABI and version.
- Missing or incompatible libraries can prevent the program from starting.







10. Static vs dynamic linking
Feature				Static linking							Dynamic linking
Library code			Incorporated into executable					Provided by shared library
Typical Linux library		.a								.so
Executable size			Often larger							Often smaller
Runtime dependency		No dependency on that linked library as a shared object		Requires compatible shared library
Library updates			Usually requires relinking					May work without relinking if compatibility is preserved
Sharing library code		Usually separate executable copies of linked code		Shared code pages can be used by multiple processes







Build process
1. Write function declarations in math_utils.h.
2. Write the function definition in math_utils.c.
3. Include the header in main.c so the compiler knows the function's interface.
4. Compile each .c file into an object file containing machine code, symbols, and relocation information.
5. Link the object files and any required libraries.
6. Run the resulting executable; the operating system loads it and its runtime dependencies.







Topic				One-line definition
Compilation			Translates C source code into lower-level code.
Object file			Compiled code plus metadata used by the linker.
Symbol table			Records information about functions, variables, and other symbols.
Linking	Resolves 		references and combines object files and libraries.
Declaration			Introduces a name and its type.
Definition			Provides a function implementation or defines an object.
Header file			Shares declarations, types, and macros between source files.
Library	Reusable 		code that programs can use.
Static linking			Incorporates required library code into the executable.
Dynamic linking			Uses shared libraries resolved by the runtime loader or linker.
Multiple source files		Split a project into separate modules that can be compiled and linked together.
